# Bioinformatics notes

## Molecular biology

### DNA and RNA

DNA (deoxyribonuclic acid) is composed of 2 strands intertwined with each other
forming a double helix. Each strand has a sugar-phosphate backbone and is a
polymer of groups called nucletides. A nucleotide is made of a phosphate group,
a pentose sugar (Deoxyribose or Ribose) and a base. Each nucleotide is linked to
the previous by a covalent bond between the phosphate group on the 5' carbon and
the hydroxyl group on the 3' carbon of the next nucleotide. There are 4 types of
bases: Adenine, Cytosine, Guanine, Thymine. Each base can have 1 ring
(pyrimidine) or 2 rings (purines). The two strands are held together by hydrogen
bonds between complementary bases: A-T, G-C.

RNA differs from DNA by being single stranded and having Ribose as opposed to
Deoxyribose in its nucleotides. Moreover in RNA Thymine is replaced with Uracil.
Being single stranded doesn't imply that base pairing doesn't happen: bases can
pair intra-molecularly and generate complex shapes.

Each strand has two ends: a 3' end (an hydroxyl group) and 5' end (a phosphate
group). The two strands run in opposite directions and are complementary. This
means that we can reconstruct the other strand by knowing one of the strands.
Each strand is read from the 5' end to the 3'.

Genetic material is compacted into chromosomes. Bacteria don't have chromosomes,
they have only one circular DNA molecule. Each species can have a
different numbers of chromosomes. Humans have 46 chromosomes.

Every living organism is encoded by one or more DNA molecules that are
continuously read and interpreted by each cell. The central dogma (now proven
wrong but generally it works) mandates that information that determines a
protein's structure contained in DNA is transcribed to RNA and the RNA is
translated into proteins.

### Proteins

Proteins are chains of amino acids (polypeptides). An amino acid is composed of
an amino group, an R group and a carboxyl group. Amino acids are linked together
by the peptide bond between the hydrogen of carboxyl group and the amino group.
Each protein start with the amino group and ends with and the carboxyl group.

Proteins tend to form different structures classified in primary (the amino acid
chain), secondary (alpha helix and beta sheet), tertiary (three dimensional
structure) and quaternary structures.

Proteins are involved in most tasks essential for life: structural, receptors,
signalers enzymes and transcription factors.
